_miscellaneous/01-yoctofpga.md, before:

---
title: "Yocto OS on UltraScale+ ZCU102"
permalink: /miscellaneous/yoctofpga

toc: true
---
This tutorial is a step-by-step guide to create a custom Yocto-linux distribution for the **Xilinx UltraScale+ ZCU102**. The tutorial has been tested ONLY on the ZCU102, but it should be working for the other Xilinx heterogeneous boards, with CPU and FPGA.

If you encounter errors not present in the **[Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)** section of this page, please open an [issue](https://github.com/mdc-suite/mdc-suite.github.io/issues) on GitHub, or send me an e-mail:

    Raffaele Meloni - raffaele.meloni99@gmail.com


## System Requirements
Please, before starting, make sure you meet the following requirements:
1. A host machine with a Yocto supported [Linux distribution](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/ref-manual/system-requirements.html#supported-linux-distributions). I've used Ubuntu 20.04 LTS on Asus Rog Zephyrus G14 2021.
2. At least 65GB free space disk on your host machine (this free space is required by the building system).
3. Stable Internet connection to fetch repositories and download files. Fast connection is recommended because many errors can be encoutered because of a bad connection.
4. All [required packages](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/ref-manual/system-requirements.html#required-packages-for-the-build-host) installed.

[Yocto documentation (3.4)](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/index.html)




## Build OS instructions
The following instructions are necessary to port Linux Yocto on the ZCU102.

### Download layers
Create a working directory (e.g ~/bin/ or another), cd into it and install the `repo` script:
```bash
$ curl https://storage.googleapis.com/git-repo-downloads/repo > repo
$ chmod a+x repo
# test repo
$ repo --help
```

Download and fetch the manifest for required layers. Replace `<release>` with a [supported release](https://xilinx-wiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/A/pages/18841883/Yocto), e.g. `rel-v2021.1` if you have installed Ubuntu 20.04 LTS:
```bash
$ repo init -u git://github.com/Xilinx/yocto-manifests.git -b <release>
$ repo sync 
# Checkout the corresponding release for each repository. If you don't it, all repositories will not have the correct release branch
$ repo start <release> --all
```
Repo uses a manifest which is an XML file that describes all the required repositories.  It can manage all of your git repositories so they remain in sync.

Now layers are available on your working directory

![Yocto layers](pictures/download-layers.png)

### Configure Yocto
Launch the Yocto Environment:
```bash
# Setupsdk is a wrapper for the familiar "oe-init-build-env" Yocto script. It creates build directory
$ source setupsdk
```

Configure `bblayers.conf` like [bblayers.conf.template](bblayers.conf.template).

Edit `local.conf`:
```bash
# Select the correct target machine
MACHINE ?= "zcu102-zynqmp"

# Generate u-boot Boot Script. Append this line
EXTRA_IMAGEDEPENDS_append = "u-boot-zynq-scr"
```


### FPGA support (optional)
If you want to use the FPGA at runtime from your OS, add this line to `local.conf`:
```bash
EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES += "fpga-manager"
```

### Launch bitbake
Once Yocto is configured you can build the OS image running:
```bash
$ bitbake petalinux-image-minimal
```
At the end of the process, image files are available at `./build/tmp/deploy/images/<target-machine>/`.
If you have included `fpga-manager` in your image, you can go to **[FPGA programming](#fpga-programming)** to see how to use it.

<details>
<summary>Click to see deploy directory content</summary>

<img src="pictures/deploy-dir.png" alt="Deploy directory content">

</details>

## Boot from SD card
Prepare an SD card creating two partitions, see this [tutorial](https://subscription.packtpub.com/book/hardware-and-creative/9781785289736/1/ch01lvl1sec12/creating%20partitions%20and%20formatting%20the%20sd%20card):
- The **first** one as a **bootable** partition (100MB, FAT16)
- The **second** one for the **rootfs** (EXT4)

Copy boot files in the **first** partition:
```bash
# cd into the deploy images directory
$ cd tmp/deploy/images/zcu102-zynqmp/

$ cp boot.scr boot.bin Image <path-first-partition>
$ cp zcu102-zynqmp-system.dtb <path-first-partition>/system.dtb
```

Extract rootfs tarball into the **second** partition.
```bash
$ sudo tar xf petalinux-image-minimal-zcu102-zynqmp.tar.gz -C <path-sd-second-partition>
```
![SD partition content](pictures/sd-partitions.png)

Then connect the board (UART) to your laptop and check the serial port using `dmesg`.
```bash
$ dmseg | grep tty
# USB is usually connected to ttyUSB*
```

Open a terminal emulation program (e.g. Putty), executed with privileges (`sudo`),


|  UART | Configuration |
| --------- | ------ |
| Baud rate | 115200 |
| Data bits | 8      |
| Stop bits | 1      |
| Parity    | None   |
 
Finally set the switches (sw6) in boot SD mode (ON, OFF, OFF, OFF) and turn on the board.

<details>
<summary>Click to see the switches configuration</summary>


<img src="pictures/sw6-sd-boot-mode.jpg" alt="sw6 boot sd mode"  width="70%">

</details>
<details>
<summary>Click to see Linux shell for ZCU102</summary>

<img src="pictures/linux-shell-zcu102.png" alt="linux terminal zcu102" >
<img src="pictures/linux-shell-zcu102-2.png" alt="linux terminal zcu102">

</details>



## FPGA programming
If you add **[FPGA support](#fpga-support-optional)** the tool `fpgautil` is available on your system. It allows you to load a binary version of a bitstream at runtime, see **[Convert bitstream to binary](bitstream-to-binary)**.
```
root@zcu102-zynqmp:~# fpgautil -h
 
fpgautil: FPGA Utility for Loading/reading PL Configuration in zynqMP
 
Usage:  fpgautil -b <bin file path> -o <dtbo file path>
 
Options: -b <binfile>           (Bin file path)
         -o <dtbofile>          (DTBO file path)
         -f <flags>             Optional:

# Useful links
<https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/index.html>

<https://xilinx-wiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/A/pages/18841862/Install+and+Build+with+Xilinx+Yocto> <AES User Key>
          -r <Readback>         Optional: <file name>
                                Default: By default Read back contents will be stored in readback.bin file
          -t                    Optional: <Readback Type>
                                   0 - Configuration Register readback
                                   1 - Configuration Data Frames readback
                                Default: 0 (Configuration register readback)
          -R                    Optional: Remove overlay from a live tree
  
Example:
(Load Bitstream)
fpgautil -b top.bit.bin
```

## Troubleshooting
Following this tutorial you can encounter errors due to host packages.
This is a list of solved errors:

1. **package require hsi FAILED**
```
ERROR: pmu-firmware-git+gitAUTOINC+d37a0e8824-r0 do_configure: Execution of '/home/raffaele/bin/build/tmp/work/zcu102_zynqmp-xilinx-linux/pmu-firmware/git+gitAUTOINC+d37a0e8824-r0/temp/run.do_configure.1520032' failed with exit code 1:
MISC_ARG is  -yamlconf /home/raffaele/bin/build/tmp/work/zcu102_zynqmp-xilinx-linux/pmu-firmware/git+gitAUTOINC+d37a0e8824-r0/pmu-firmware.yaml
APP_ARG is  -app "ZynqMP PMU Firmware"
Using xsct from: /home/raffaele/bin/build/xsct/Vitis/2021.1/bin/xsct
cmd is: xsct -sdx -nodisp 
......
......
package require hsi FAILED:
invalid command name "hsi::create_dt_node"
    while executing
"hsi::create_dt_node -help"
    (in namespace eval "::hsi::help" script line 6)
    invoked from within
"namespace eval ::hsi::help {
    variable version 0.1
    ::xsdb::setcmdmeta {hsi create_dt_node} categories {hsi}
    ::xsdb::setcmdmeta {hsi create..."
    (file "/home/raffaele/bin/build/xsct/Vitis/2021.1/scripts/xsct/hsi/hsihelp.tcl" line 25)
    invoked from within
"source /home/raffaele/bin/build/xsct/Vitis/2021.1/scripts/xsct/hsi/hsihelp.tcl"
    ("package ifneeded hsi::help 0.1" script)WARNING: exit code 1 from a shell command.
......
......
```

    **Solution:** install `libtinfo5`. 
    
    **Related issue:** [https://github.com/Xilinx/meta-xilinx-tools/issues/19](https://github.com/Xilinx/meta-xilinx-tools/issues/19).

2. **configure: error: raw selected, but required raw.h header file not available**
```
    ERROR: util-linux-native-2.36-r0 do_configure: configure failed
    ERROR: util-linux-native-2.36-r0 do_configure: Execution of '/home/raffaele/zcu102-os-tutorial/build/tmp/work/x86_64-linux/util-linux-native/2.36-r0/temp/run.do_configure.350741' failed with exit code 1:
    automake (GNU automake) 1.16.2
    Copyright (C) 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    License GPLv2+: GNU GPL version 2 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html>
    This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
    There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

    Written by Tom Tromey <tromey@redhat.com> 
        and Alexandre Duret-Lutz <adl@gnu.thisorg>.
    AUTOV is 1.16
    autoreconf: Entering directory .
    ......
    ......
    ......
    | checking for syscall prlimit64... SYS_prlimit64
    | checking for prlimit... yes
    | checking for syscall pivot_root... SYS_pivot_root
    | configure: error: raw selected, but required raw.h header file not available
    | WARNING: exit code 1 from a shell command.
    | 
    ERROR: Task (virtual:native:/home/raffaele/zcu102-os-tutorial/sources/core/meta/recipes-core/util-linux/util-linux_2.36.bb:do_configure) failed with exit code '1'
    NOTE: Tasks Summary: Attempted 1010 tasks of which 0 didn't need to be rerun and 1 failed.
    NOTE: Writing buildhistory
    NOTE: Writing buildhistory took: 4 seconds

    Summary: 1 task failed:
    virtual:native:/home/raffaele/zcu102-os-tutorial/sources/core/meta/recipes-core/util-linux/util-linux_2.36.bb:do_configure
    Summary: There were 4 WARNING messages shown.
    Summary: There were 2 ERROR messages shown, returning a non-zero exit code.
```
    In recent linux kernel raw.h file was removed.
    
    **Solution:** append this line in your `conf/local.conf` (<font color="green">preferred</font>)
    ```bash 
    # Fix configure: error: raw selected, but required raw.h header file not available for new host kernels
    EXTRA_OECONF_remove = "--enable-raw"
    ```
    or remove directly `--enable-row` from EXTRA_OECONF in `./sources/core/meta/recipes-core/util-linux/util-linux_2.36.bb`. 
    
    **Related issue:** [fix enable raw](https://lists.yoctoproject.org/g/yocto/topic/util_linux_and_enable_raw/86266370?p=,,,20,0,0,0::recentpostdate/sticky,,,20,2,0,86266370,previd=1634094655266752289,nextid=1633973089717825518&previd=1634094655266752289&nextid=1633973089717825518).

*This list will be updated over time.*

Commit message:

Added author and contact us

_miscellaneous/01-yoctofpga.md, after:

---
title: "Yocto OS on UltraScale+ ZCU102"
permalink: /miscellaneous/yoctofpga

toc: true
---
This tutorial is a step-by-step guide to create a custom Yocto-linux distribution for the **Xilinx UltraScale+ ZCU102**. The tutorial has been tested ONLY on the ZCU102, but it should be working for the other Xilinx heterogeneous boards, with CPU and FPGA.

The result of this tutorial can be downloaded here: <a href="downloads/linux-yocto-zcu102_rel-v2021.1.tar.gz" class="btn btn--info" style="display: inline-block;">Download Yocto ZCU102</a>

**Last update the 14/01/2022 - Tutorial created by R. Meloni**

## Contact us
If you encounter errors not present in the **[Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)** section of this page, please open an [issue](https://github.com/mdc-suite/mdc-suite.github.io/issues) on GitHub, or an e-mail to:

    Raffaele Meloni - raffaele.meloni99@gmail.com
    Daniel Madroñal - dmadronalquin@uniss.it


## System Requirements
Please, before starting, make sure you meet the following requirements:
1. A host machine with a Yocto supported [Linux distribution](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/ref-manual/system-requirements.html#supported-linux-distributions). I've used Ubuntu 20.04 LTS on Asus Rog Zephyrus G14 2021.
2. At least 65GB free space disk on your host machine (this free space is required by the building system).
3. Stable Internet connection to fetch repositories and download files. Fast connection is recommended because many errors can be encoutered because of a bad connection.
4. All [required packages](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/ref-manual/system-requirements.html#required-packages-for-the-build-host) installed.

[Yocto documentation (3.4)](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/index.html)




## Build OS instructions
The following instructions are necessary to port Linux Yocto on the ZCU102.

### Download layers
Create a working directory (e.g ~/bin/ or another), cd into it and install the `repo` script:
```bash
$ curl https://storage.googleapis.com/git-repo-downloads/repo > repo
$ chmod a+x repo
# test repo
$ repo --help
```

Download and fetch the manifest for required layers. Replace `<release>` with a [supported release](https://xilinx-wiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/A/pages/18841883/Yocto), e.g. `rel-v2021.1` if you have installed Ubuntu 20.04 LTS:
```bash
$ repo init -u git://github.com/Xilinx/yocto-manifests.git -b <release>
$ repo sync 
# Checkout the corresponding release for each repository. If you don't it, all repositories will not have the correct release branch
$ repo start <release> --all
```
Repo uses a manifest which is an XML file that describes all the required repositories.  It can manage all of your git repositories so they remain in sync.

Now layers are available on your working directory

![Yocto layers](pictures/download-layers.png)

### Configure Yocto
Launch the Yocto Environment:
```bash
# Setupsdk is a wrapper for the familiar "oe-init-build-env" Yocto script. It creates build directory
$ source setupsdk
```

Configure `bblayers.conf` like [bblayers.conf.template](bblayers.conf.template).

Edit `local.conf`:
```bash
# Select the correct target machine
MACHINE ?= "zcu102-zynqmp"

# Generate u-boot Boot Script. Append this line
EXTRA_IMAGEDEPENDS_append = "u-boot-zynq-scr"
```


### FPGA support (optional)
If you want to use the FPGA at runtime from your OS, add this line to `local.conf`:
```bash
EXTRA_IMAGE_FEATURES += "fpga-manager"
```

### Launch bitbake
Once Yocto is configured you can build the OS image running:
```bash
$ bitbake petalinux-image-minimal
```
At the end of the process, image files are available at `./build/tmp/deploy/images/<target-machine>/`.
If you have included `fpga-manager` in your image, you can go to **[FPGA programming](#fpga-programming)** to see how to use it.

<details>
<summary>Click to see deploy directory content</summary>

<img src="pictures/deploy-dir.png" alt="Deploy directory content">

</details>

## Boot from SD card
Prepare an SD card creating two partitions, see this [tutorial](https://subscription.packtpub.com/book/hardware-and-creative/9781785289736/1/ch01lvl1sec12/creating%20partitions%20and%20formatting%20the%20sd%20card):
- The **first** one as a **bootable** partition (100MB, FAT16)
- The **second** one for the **rootfs** (EXT4)

Copy boot files in the **first** partition:
```bash
# cd into the deploy images directory
$ cd tmp/deploy/images/zcu102-zynqmp/

$ cp boot.scr boot.bin Image <path-first-partition>
$ cp zcu102-zynqmp-system.dtb <path-first-partition>/system.dtb
```

Extract rootfs tarball into the **second** partition.
```bash
$ sudo tar xf petalinux-image-minimal-zcu102-zynqmp.tar.gz -C <path-sd-second-partition>
```
![SD partition content](pictures/sd-partitions.png)

Then connect the board (UART) to your laptop and check the serial port using `dmesg`.
```bash
$ dmseg | grep tty
# USB is usually connected to ttyUSB*
```

Open a terminal emulation program (e.g. Putty), executed with privileges (`sudo`),


|  UART | Configuration |
| --------- | ------ |
| Baud rate | 115200 |
| Data bits | 8      |
| Stop bits | 1      |
| Parity    | None   |
 
Finally set the switches (sw6) in boot SD mode (ON, OFF, OFF, OFF) and turn on the board.

<details>
<summary>Click to see the switches configuration</summary>


<img src="pictures/sw6-sd-boot-mode.jpg" alt="sw6 boot sd mode"  width="70%">

</details>
<details>
<summary>Click to see Linux shell for ZCU102</summary>

<img src="pictures/linux-shell-zcu102.png" alt="linux terminal zcu102" >
<img src="pictures/linux-shell-zcu102-2.png" alt="linux terminal zcu102">

</details>



## FPGA programming
If you add **[FPGA support](#fpga-support-optional)** the tool `fpgautil` is available on your system. It allows you to load a binary version of a bitstream at runtime, see **[Convert bitstream to binary](bitstream-to-binary)**.
```
root@zcu102-zynqmp:~# fpgautil -h
 
fpgautil: FPGA Utility for Loading/reading PL Configuration in zynqMP
 
Usage:  fpgautil -b <bin file path> -o <dtbo file path>
 
Options: -b <binfile>           (Bin file path)
         -o <dtbofile>          (DTBO file path)
         -f <flags>             Optional:

# Useful links
<https://docs.yoctoproject.org/3.4/index.html>

<https://xilinx-wiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/A/pages/18841862/Install+and+Build+with+Xilinx+Yocto> <AES User Key>
          -r <Readback>         Optional: <file name>
                                Default: By default Read back contents will be stored in readback.bin file
          -t                    Optional: <Readback Type>
                                   0 - Configuration Register readback
                                   1 - Configuration Data Frames readback
                                Default: 0 (Configuration register readback)
          -R                    Optional: Remove overlay from a live tree
  
Example:
(Load Bitstream)
fpgautil -b top.bit.bin
```

## Troubleshooting
Following this tutorial you can encounter errors due to host packages.
This is a list of solved errors:

1. **package require hsi FAILED**
```
ERROR: pmu-firmware-git+gitAUTOINC+d37a0e8824-r0 do_configure: Execution of '/home/raffaele/bin/build/tmp/work/zcu102_zynqmp-xilinx-linux/pmu-firmware/git+gitAUTOINC+d37a0e8824-r0/temp/run.do_configure.1520032' failed with exit code 1:
MISC_ARG is  -yamlconf /home/raffaele/bin/build/tmp/work/zcu102_zynqmp-xilinx-linux/pmu-firmware/git+gitAUTOINC+d37a0e8824-r0/pmu-firmware.yaml
APP_ARG is  -app "ZynqMP PMU Firmware"
Using xsct from: /home/raffaele/bin/build/xsct/Vitis/2021.1/bin/xsct
cmd is: xsct -sdx -nodisp 
......
......
package require hsi FAILED:
invalid command name "hsi::create_dt_node"
    while executing
"hsi::create_dt_node -help"
    (in namespace eval "::hsi::help" script line 6)
    invoked from within
"namespace eval ::hsi::help {
    variable version 0.1
    ::xsdb::setcmdmeta {hsi create_dt_node} categories {hsi}
    ::xsdb::setcmdmeta {hsi create..."
    (file "/home/raffaele/bin/build/xsct/Vitis/2021.1/scripts/xsct/hsi/hsihelp.tcl" line 25)
    invoked from within
"source /home/raffaele/bin/build/xsct/Vitis/2021.1/scripts/xsct/hsi/hsihelp.tcl"
    ("package ifneeded hsi::help 0.1" script)WARNING: exit code 1 from a shell command.
......
......
```

    **Solution:** install `libtinfo5`. 
    
    **Related issue:** [https://github.com/Xilinx/meta-xilinx-tools/issues/19](https://github.com/Xilinx/meta-xilinx-tools/issues/19).

2. **configure: error: raw selected, but required raw.h header file not available**
```
    ERROR: util-linux-native-2.36-r0 do_configure: configure failed
    ERROR: util-linux-native-2.36-r0 do_configure: Execution of '/home/raffaele/zcu102-os-tutorial/build/tmp/work/x86_64-linux/util-linux-native/2.36-r0/temp/run.do_configure.350741' failed with exit code 1:
    automake (GNU automake) 1.16.2
    Copyright (C) 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    License GPLv2+: GNU GPL version 2 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html>
    This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
    There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

    Written by Tom Tromey <tromey@redhat.com> 
        and Alexandre Duret-Lutz <adl@gnu.thisorg>.
    AUTOV is 1.16
    autoreconf: Entering directory .
    ......
    ......
    ......
    | checking for syscall prlimit64... SYS_prlimit64
    | checking for prlimit... yes
    | checking for syscall pivot_root... SYS_pivot_root
    | configure: error: raw selected, but required raw.h header file not available
    | WARNING: exit code 1 from a shell command.
    | 
    ERROR: Task (virtual:native:/home/raffaele/zcu102-os-tutorial/sources/core/meta/recipes-core/util-linux/util-linux_2.36.bb:do_configure) failed with exit code '1'
    NOTE: Tasks Summary: Attempted 1010 tasks of which 0 didn't need to be rerun and 1 failed.
    NOTE: Writing buildhistory
    NOTE: Writing buildhistory took: 4 seconds

    Summary: 1 task failed:
    virtual:native:/home/raffaele/zcu102-os-tutorial/sources/core/meta/recipes-core/util-linux/util-linux_2.36.bb:do_configure
    Summary: There were 4 WARNING messages shown.
    Summary: There were 2 ERROR messages shown, returning a non-zero exit code.
```
    In recent linux kernel raw.h file was removed.
    
    **Solution:** append this line in your `conf/local.conf` (<font color="green">preferred</font>)
    ```bash 
    # Fix configure: error: raw selected, but required raw.h header file not available for new host kernels
    EXTRA_OECONF_remove = "--enable-raw"
    ```
    or remove directly `--enable-row` from EXTRA_OECONF in `./sources/core/meta/recipes-core/util-linux/util-linux_2.36.bb`. 
    
    **Related issue:** [fix enable raw](https://lists.yoctoproject.org/g/yocto/topic/util_linux_and_enable_raw/86266370?p=,,,20,0,0,0::recentpostdate/sticky,,,20,2,0,86266370,previd=1634094655266752289,nextid=1633973089717825518&previd=1634094655266752289&nextid=1633973089717825518).

*This list will be updated over time.*
